Add future processing plan (#155)
WayScience/NF1_3D_organoid_profiling_pipeline: docs/source/future_processing_plan.md

---

> title: Future processing plan

Reviewer: I think this plan looks good from an engineering perspective. The major thing missing here is the integration of ZedProfiler (which is not currently used in the repo). And there is no written plan on how that looks, the outputs it generates and how (or if) CytoTable fits into the ZP outputs. 

The piece of the current workflow that needs work is the featurization -> ibp modules.

Author: Thanks, I'll re-formalize / lift up the mentions of zedprofiler to be more explicit about how that fits into the picture here.

---

# Future processing plan

This pipeline will become a **manifest-driven bioimage profiling warehouse**: every image, object, QC result, feature table, and patient annotation is joinable by stable identifiers, without requiring a bespoke database service.
The design follows the [iceberg-bioimage warehouse specification][iceberg-warehouse], uses [OME-Arrow][ome-arrow] where image payloads or chunk metadata need tabular access, and uses [**ZedProfiler**][zedprofiler] as the feature extractor for morphology profiles.
ZedProfiler's [feature naming convention][zedprofiler-features] is the column standard for profile outputs.

## Target data contract

> The warehouse lives on **Isilon storage**, not directly in the Git repository.

Reviewer: Except when computing on Alpine or HPCs that do not have access to such. Then the data do live in the git repo in a data dir that is `gitignored`

Author: Thanks, updated to be more explicit about this.

The repository stores workflow code, schema definitions, validation code, configuration, and small reference manifests that point to the Isilon warehouse location.
Each Isilon warehouse root contains Parquet-first tables plus **`warehouse_manifest.json`**.
**OME-TIFF** or **OME-Zarr** remain the source image assets when that is sufficient; **OME-Arrow** is reserved for derived crops, chunk indexes, or image tensors that need to be joined and filtered with profiles in DuckDB.
The [OME-Arrow benchmarks][ome-arrow-benchmarks] justify this selective use: reported results include faster bulk image reads and writes for Arrow-backed layouts, a roughly millisecond-scale NF1 feature-to-image join, and faster metadata scans than converted OME-Zarr metadata.

Required namespaces and tables:

- `images.image_assets`: one row per image asset with `dataset_id`, `patient_id`, `plate_id`, `well_id`, `field_id`, `image_id`, channel, z/t/c/y/x shape, dtype, source URI, and processing provenance.
- `quality_control.image_qc`: blur, saturation, corruption, and exclusion flags keyed by `image_id`, with patient, well, and field metadata repeated only when useful for reading.

> - `profiles.organoid_profiles`, `profiles.cell_profiles`, `profiles.nuclei_profiles`, `profiles.cytoplasm_profiles`, and `profiles.nucleocentric_profiles`: one biological object type per table, each keyed by `dataset_id`, `image_id`, `object_id`, and, when relevant, `parent_organoid_id` or `parent_cell_id`.

Reviewer: We have a spec for metadata naming conventions for patients, objects, organoids etc. Where they start with Metadata_<metadata_category>_metadata_name. etc

Would we retain this in place of the dataset_id for the name space? Or will the column/key be named dataset_id?

Author: Let's keep to the spec for naming with metadata, I'll update accordingly.

- `profiles.normalized_profiles`, `profiles.selected_profiles`, and `profiles.consensus_profiles`: derived analytical tables that preserve the same stable identifiers and declare their parent tables in the manifest.
- `profiles.patient_treatment_annotations`: patient, tumor, plate map, treatment, dose, unit, target, class, and therapeutic category keyed by patient and well.

**Column naming is enforced before writing shared outputs.**

> Feature columns use **`{Compartment}_{Channel}_{FeatureType}_{Measurement}`**; metadata columns use **`Metadata_{Category}_{Name}`**.

Reviewer: ah you answered my questiosn here!

        warehouse_references["warehouse reference manifests"]
    end

    subgraph curc_persistence["CURC Persistence1"]
        nextflow_controller["Nextflow controller"]
        run_reports["trace / timeline / report"]
    end

    subgraph alpine_slurm["Alpine SLURM"]
        qc_jobs["QC jobs"]
        segmentation_jobs["segmentation jobs"]
        featurization_jobs["ZedProfiler feature extraction jobs"]
        profile_jobs["normalization / aggregation jobs"]
    end

    subgraph isilon_warehouse["Isilon warehouse root"]
        warehouse_manifest["warehouse_manifest.json"]
        image_assets["images.image_assets"]
        image_qc["quality_control.image_qc"]
        object_profiles["profiles.object_tables"]
        derived_profiles["profiles.derived_profiles"]
        treatment_annotations["profiles.patient_treatment_annotations"]
        ome_arrow_assets["OME-Arrow crops / chunk index"]
    end

    nextflow_pipeline --> nextflow_controller
    schema_specs --> nextflow_controller
    validation_code --> nextflow_controller
    warehouse_references -.-> warehouse_manifest
    nextflow_controller -->|sbatch| qc_jobs
    nextflow_controller -->|sbatch| segmentation_jobs

>     nextflow_controller -->|sbatch| featurization_jobs

Reviewer: Not sure if it is worth showing the job depedency here where features cannot run until after segmentations are run?

Author: Good idea! This was hard to depict within mermaid in a way that makes the diagram pretty, but I made changes to reflect this and it still feels functionally accurate :) .

    nextflow_controller -->|sbatch| profile_jobs
    qc_jobs --> image_qc
    segmentation_jobs --> image_assets
    segmentation_jobs --> object_profiles
    featurization_jobs --> object_profiles
    profile_jobs --> derived_profiles
    image_assets --> warehouse_manifest
    image_qc --> warehouse_manifest
    object_profiles --> warehouse_manifest
    derived_profiles --> warehouse_manifest
    treatment_annotations --> warehouse_manifest
    ome_arrow_assets --> warehouse_manifest
    run_reports --> warehouse_manifest
```

## Workflow and observability

### Workflow manager

The workflow layer treats **SLURM as a first-class execution backend**, because the current shell-plus-SLURM pattern is practical but too hard to audit, resume, and parameterize across patients.

> **Nextflow is the workflow manager for this pipeline** because its [SLURM executor][nextflow-slurm] submits each process as a separate SLURM job and supports queue controls, local execution, containers, caching, resumable runs, and selective job arrays for homogeneous high-cardinality tasks.

Reviewer: I am not too sure about resumable runs here? might need to be already a feature on the slurm system?

Author: I think this stems from nextflow capabilities. I'll revise here.

### Run records

Each step writes a small run record next to its outputs: command, git commit, container or environment hash, input table versions, row counts, column counts, elapsed time, and pass/fail status.

### Observability

**Observability combines Nextflow run artifacts with SLURM accounting** rather than requiring a separate monitoring server.
Nextflow emits a trace table, timeline report, DAG, execution report, `.nextflow.log`, and per-process logs under a stable run directory.
The trace table captures process name, patient, well/FOV shard, status, attempt, runtime, CPU, memory, exit code, work directory, and published outputs.
SLURM job IDs are retained so failed or slow tasks can be inspected with `sacct`, `squeue`, `seff`, and the process `.command.out` and `.command.err` files.
A single DuckDB validation script combines these run artifacts with the warehouse manifest to check manifest conformance, join-key uniqueness, feature-name validity, orphaned profiles, QC filtering rates, failed tasks, retry counts, and resource outliers.

## Implementation sequence

> 1. **Pilot subset selection:** choose one representative patient with a few wells and FOVs that cover normal images, QC failures, segmentation edge cases, and one treatment/control contrast.

Reviewer: Consider choosing two patients and a few well_fovs from each the information captured across patients is quite different qith resepct to image size and object number which both affect job time and resources

Author: Good idea, I'll update here to reflect your guidance.

2. **Pilot workflow orchestration:** run the pilot subset through the Nextflow `slurm` profile on CURC Persistence1 and Alpine, using the existing stage commands and publishing all Nextflow and SLURM observability artifacts.

> 3. **Pilot warehouse conversion:** publish the pilot workflow outputs to the pilot Isilon warehouse path to finalize identifier rules, canonical table schemas, ZedProfiler feature-name validation, `warehouse_manifest.json`, and DuckDB validation.

Reviewer: Consider adding a note on how to handle non-persistence files in the scratch space?

Author: Good point! Adding this in.

4. **Production workflow rollout:** apply the same Nextflow profile and warehouse writer to the production dataset after the pilot passes orchestration, output, validation, and job-array checks.

> 5. **Cross-patient queries:** replace ad hoc patient concatenation with manifest-aware DuckDB queries over the production warehouse tables.

Reviewer: I would remove this point all together. We have two choices for analyzing the patient profiles. We can either analyze them as indivually processed or combined. We are doing both depending on the analysis.
1. for isolated patient profiles we are keepin them as is
2. For combined patient profiles we need ad hoc concatenation to perform feature-selection and aggragation.

Author: Thanks - appreciate the insights here. I couldn't tell if you meant the entirety of pilot work or just the queries at the end. For the queries, I'd urge that we can still send these to feature-selection or aggregation for pycytominer either through a dataframe or ad-hoc concatenation outside of this work (for that later step). Ideally, in a future state, Pycytominer is reading from non-concatenated sources in iceberg (making for time reduction in processing - 1 fewer step to achieve the same data outcomes). Mostly here I feel from the standpoint of the query step, I feel we're just validating that things look as expected in a lightweight manner.

> 6. **Operational validation:** emit run records, Nextflow/SLURM observability artifacts, and a one-command validation report for collaborators, maintainers, and release checkpoints.

Reviewer: Number six here will also need to track the well-fov process through image-based profiling. Often the segmentation and featurization will work only for there to be an error downstream at this step too

Author: Thanks, added.

## Implementation scope

The first milestone runs the small-data pilot through the workflow layer and publishes the resulting outputs to the pilot Isilon warehouse.

> The next milestone applies the proven workflow and warehouse writer to the production dataset.

Reviewer: I am hesitant with the word proven here. Proven in a general sense but not for these data, yet.

Author: Thanks, I'll move to pilot validated instead.

A later milestone backfills prior patients, moves cross-patient profile generation onto manifest-aware queries, decides whether OME-Arrow is needed for image crops or chunk-level access, and formalizes QC decision policy.

> The highest-risk work is not the Parquet writing itself; it is making stable identifiers, patient/well/FOV metadata, object-parent links, and QC decisions consistent across batches.

Reviewer: If QC is the highest risk, then we should talk about it and asses prior to running?

Author: Thanks, I'll soften the language here a bit more, but yeah worth considering how this changes things here. Maybe @jenna-tomkinson also has thoughts?

Reviewer: I think a question here for @jenna-tomkinson (which we might not know yet) is whole image QC or object level qc and where do both go in the pipe?

Reviewer 2: @d33bs @MikeLippincott I think that whole image QC and object level QC are outside the scope of the featurization step and will not impact this workflow process.

- `profiles.normalized_profiles`, `profiles.selected_profiles`, and `profiles.consensus_profiles`: derived analytical tables that preserve the same stable identifiers and declare their parent tables in the manifest.
- `profiles.patient_treatment_annotations`: patient, tumor, plate map, treatment, dose, unit, target, class, and therapeutic category keyed by patient and well.

**Column naming is enforced before writing shared outputs.**
Feature columns use **`{Compartment}_{Channel}_{FeatureType}_{Measurement}`**; metadata columns use **`Metadata_{Category}_{Name}`**.
The current `image_set` and `WellFOV` concepts become explicit **`Metadata_Experiment_WellID`** and **`Metadata_Imaging_FieldID`** values, with **`Metadata_Imaging_ImageID`** as the durable join key across image assets, segmentation masks, QC, and profiles.
Plain names such as `dataset_id` and `image_id` remain logical shorthand in implementation discussions, not profile-table column names.

```mermaid

> flowchart LR

Reviewer: This looks great!

Author: Cheers, thanks, teamwork!

Nextflow emits a trace table, timeline report, DAG, execution report, `.nextflow.log`, and per-process logs under a stable run directory.
The trace table captures process name, patient, well/FOV shard, status, attempt, runtime, CPU, memory, exit code, work directory, and published outputs.
SLURM job IDs are retained so failed or slow tasks can be inspected with `sacct`, `squeue`, `seff`, and the process `.command.out` and `.command.err` files.
A single DuckDB validation script combines these run artifacts with the warehouse manifest to check manifest conformance, join-key uniqueness, feature-name validity, orphaned profiles, QC filtering rates, failed tasks, retry counts, and resource outliers.

## ZedProfiler integration

The main implementation work is the **featurization to image-based profiling** handoff.
ZedProfiler replaces the current local featurization modules as the production feature extractor for object-level 3D morphology profiles.
Its inputs are the registered image assets, segmentation masks, channel metadata, object identifiers, and parent-object relationships produced upstream.

> Its outputs are per-compartment feature tables for nuclei, cells, cytoplasm, organoids, and nucleocentric objects, written with ZedProfiler-compatible feature names and `Metadata_*` identifiers.

Reviewer: Currently, the nucleocentric featurization lives external of ZedProfiler.
The ZP features are:
- Colocalization
- Granularity
- Intensity
- Neighbors
- Texture
- VolumeSizeShape

Our DL featurization workflow is:
- Masked 3D DL (used pixels external of the mask as pixel value 0) and feeds into the DL model
    - For all masks (Nuclei, Cell, Cytoplasm, and Organoid)
- Nucleocentric Non-masked 3D DL (uses whole sc crop from nuclei mask
- Nucleocentric Non0masked 2D DL (z-max projection of the 3D nucleocentric crop fed into a 2D DL model)

These are where DP will cover in the future but for now will still be bespoke code, unfortunately.

Author: Thanks - I added some explicit mentions of what you brought up here.

Those outputs publish directly into `profiles.object_tables`, then flow into existing normalization, feature selection, aggregation, and consensus-profile logic.
[CytoTable][cytotable] is not the execution engine for this path.
CytoTable remains a compatibility bridge if ZedProfiler outputs need conversion into pycytominer-oriented table shapes or if CellProfiler-style outputs remain in part of the workflow.

## Implementation sequence

> 1. **Pilot subset selection:** choose two representative patients with a few well/FOVs from each to cover normal images, QC failures, segmentation edge cases, one treatment/control contrast, image-size variation, and object-count variation.

Reviewer: I recommend 
NF0014_T1 and NF0055_T1 as the patients to subset on and pick DMSO wells and treated wells

Author: Thanks, added these in.

> 2. **Pilot workflow orchestration:** run the pilot subset through the Nextflow `slurm` profile on CURC Persistence1 and Alpine, using scratch only for temporary work and publishing all Nextflow and SLURM observability artifacts.

Reviewer: Where do these get published to?

Author: Thanks, added this; short answer: scratch -> isilon.

- **More minimal architecture:** the proposed plan is already the minimum viable structure for this dataset because it includes only stable IDs, a manifest, Parquet tables, Nextflow-on-SLURM execution, and lightweight validation.
- **Simpler data storage:** loose Parquet files, CSVs, and one-off DuckDB files are easy to write, but they do not define stable identifiers, table lineage, required schemas, or image-to-profile joins.
- **CellProfiler:** remains useful for established image QC and feature extraction modules, but it is not the warehouse, scheduler, provenance system, or cross-patient profile query layer.
- **CytoTable as execution engine:** remains useful for converting and joining CellProfiler-style tables, but it is not an orchestrator for SLURM jobs, long-running workflow state, retries, run observability, or warehouse-level contracts.
- **scverse:** might be useful downstream for selected single-cell matrices, but it is not the primary data model for multi-compartment 3D image assets, masks, QC tables, patient annotations, and parent-object relationships.

## Required specifications

Two small project specifications precede implementation:

> - **Identifier spec:** deterministic `dataset_id`, `image_id`, `object_id`, and parent object rules, including how IDs survive reprocessing.

Reviewer: IMO
`dataset_id` - should be the plate which in this case is the patient_tumor 
`object_id` should be the mask pixel value

Author: Thanks, sounds good on the dataset_id front, for the object_id I feel this should be a UID for the object being recorded (organelle obj, organoid obj, etc).

The repository tracks workflow code, schema definitions, validation code, configuration, and small reference manifests that point to the active warehouse location.
Each warehouse root contains Parquet-first tables plus **`warehouse_manifest.json`**.
**OME-TIFF** or **OME-Zarr** remain the source image assets when that is sufficient; **OME-Arrow** is reserved for derived crops, chunk indexes, or image tensors that need to be joined and filtered with profiles in DuckDB.
The [OME-Arrow benchmarks][ome-arrow-benchmarks] justify this selective use: reported results include faster bulk image reads and writes for Arrow-backed layouts, a roughly millisecond-scale NF1 feature-to-image join, and faster metadata scans than converted OME-Zarr metadata.

Required namespaces and tables:

- `images.image_assets`: one row per image asset with `Metadata_Biology_PatientTumor`, `Metadata_Biology_PatientID`, `Metadata_Experiment_PlateID`, `Metadata_Experiment_WellID`, `Metadata_Imaging_FieldID`, `Metadata_Imaging_ImageID`, channel, z/t/c/y/x shape, dtype, source URI, and processing provenance.

> - `quality_control.image_qc`: blur, saturation, corruption, and exclusion flags keyed by `Metadata_Imaging_ImageID`, with patient, well, and field metadata repeated only when useful for reading.

Reviewer 2: Does this come from CellProfiler? Is this something that already exists?

Author: Thanks - I think CP provides a good starting point but that we should elaborate as we go. Perhaps MIICE or other experimental work here would be good? I made some changes to help get us further along for this comment.

- `profiles.organoid_profiles`, `profiles.cell_profiles`, `profiles.nuclei_profiles`, `profiles.cytoplasm_profiles`, and `profiles.nucleocentric_profiles`: one biological object type per table, each keyed by `Metadata_Biology_PatientTumor`, `Metadata_Imaging_ImageID`, `Metadata_Object_ObjectID`, and, when relevant, `Metadata_Object_ParentOrganoidID` or `Metadata_Object_ParentCellID`.

> - `profiles.normalized_profiles`, `profiles.selected_profiles`, and `profiles.consensus_profiles`: derived analytical tables that preserve the same stable identifiers and declare their parent tables in the manifest.

Reviewer 2: Shouldn't there be a middle step here for `profiles.cqc_flags` or something similar?

Author: Good idea - I added a step for "profiles.cqc_flags".

**Nextflow is the workflow manager for this pipeline** because its [SLURM executor][nextflow-slurm] submits each process as a separate SLURM job and supports queue controls, local execution, containers, task caching, `-resume`-based workflow continuation, and selective job arrays for homogeneous high-cardinality tasks.
**SLURM job arrays** are used selectively for uniform per-well/FOV shards such as QC, segmentation, and featurization when resource requirements are consistent.
Tasks with variable memory, GPU, walltime, or container needs remain ordinary SLURM jobs.

### CURC deployment

On University of Colorado Research Computing infrastructure, the deployment model runs the **Nextflow controller** on [Persistence1][curc-persistence1], which CURC documents as the place for workflow managers.
The controller does not perform substantial image processing itself.
Instead, it submits each pipeline process to Alpine as an independent SLURM job through `sbatch`, monitors task state, and launches downstream work when dependencies are satisfied.

> This gives the pipeline a persistent orchestration layer while allowing segmentation, ZedProfiler feature extraction, QC, normalization, and aggregation jobs to use SLURM scheduling, resource allocation, retries, and fault isolation independently.

Reviewer 2: Recommend adding explicit software references.
```suggestion
This gives the pipeline a persistent orchestration layer while allowing 3D segmentation, ZedProfiler feature extraction, coSMicQC single-cell quality control, and Pycytominer preprocessing jobs to use SLURM scheduling, resource allocation, retries, and fault isolation independently.
```

Author: Thanks, updated!

## ZedProfiler integration

The main implementation work is the **featurization to image-based profiling** handoff.
ZedProfiler replaces the current local handcrafted featurization modules as the production feature extractor for supported object-level 3D morphology profiles.
Its inputs are the registered image assets, segmentation masks, channel metadata, object identifiers, and parent-object relationships produced upstream.
Its supported feature classes are Colocalization, Granularity, Intensity, Neighbors, Texture, and VolumeSizeShape.
Its outputs are per-compartment handcrafted feature tables for nuclei, cells, cytoplasm, and organoids, written with ZedProfiler-compatible feature names and `Metadata_*` identifiers.
Bespoke deep-learning featurization remains in the workflow for masked 3D features across nuclei, cells, cytoplasm, and organoids.
Bespoke deep-learning featurization also remains for nucleocentric non-masked 3D crops from the nuclei mask and nucleocentric non-masked 2D z-maximum projections.

> All handcrafted and deep-learning feature outputs publish into `profiles.object_tables`, then flow into existing normalization, feature selection, aggregation, and consensus-profile logic.

Reviewer 2: Segmentation QC?

Author: Nice, adding this in.

[CytoTable][cytotable] is not the execution engine for this path.

> CytoTable remains a compatibility bridge if ZedProfiler outputs need conversion into pycytominer-oriented table shapes or if CellProfiler-style outputs remain in part of the workflow.

Reviewer 2: What does "pycytominer-oriented" mean? Wouldn't single-cell tables be more explicit and accurate?

Author: Thanks , rephrased to "single-cell or object-profile"

## Implementation sequence

> 1. **Pilot subset selection:** use `NF0014_T1` and `NF0055_T1`, selecting a few DMSO and treated well/FOVs from each to cover normal images, QC failures, segmentation edge cases, image-size variation, and object-count variation.

Reviewer 2: What do QC failures mean in this case? Whole image QC or single-cell QC (segmentation artifacts)? In this order, this likely is whole image QC which we also do not have a solid workflow yet for 3D if I remember correctly.

Author: Thanks - I'll try to add in some details here. Maybe @MikeLippincott has thoughts too.

2. **Pilot workflow orchestration:** run the pilot subset through the Nextflow `slurm` profile on CURC Persistence1 and Alpine, using scratch only for temporary work and publishing durable Nextflow and SLURM observability artifacts to the active pilot warehouse run-artifacts path on Isilon or the gitignored `data/` fallback.
3. **Pilot warehouse conversion:** publish the pilot workflow outputs to the active pilot warehouse path to finalize identifier rules, canonical table schemas, ZedProfiler feature-name validation, `warehouse_manifest.json`, and DuckDB validation.

> 4. **Pre-production QC assessment:** review pilot QC flags, exclusion rates, object counts, segmentation failures, and downstream profile failures before expanding to the production dataset.

Reviewer 2: Through coSMicQC? This would make sense given post-ZedProfiler, but I recommend being more explicit here. Also note that coSMicQC in its current form expects outputs from CytoTable, so would the above schema work?

Author: I think cosmicqc makes sense. I feel cosmicqc too will be iceberg-bioimage-ready at some near point in the future.

5. **Production workflow rollout:** apply the same Nextflow profile and warehouse writer to the production dataset after the pilot passes orchestration, output, validation, QC, and job-array checks.
6. **DuckDB validation view:** use DuckDB to inspect pilot and production warehouse tables for expected joins, row counts, metadata completeness, feature columns, and QC flag propagation.
7. **Operational validation:** emit run records, Nextflow/SLURM observability artifacts, well/FOV-level profiling status, and a one-command validation report for collaborators, maintainers, and release checkpoints.
The validation report tracks each well/FOV from segmentation through ZedProfiler feature extraction and downstream image-based profiling so late-stage profile errors are visible even when earlier stages succeed.

## Implementation scope

The first milestone runs the small-data pilot through the workflow layer and publishes the resulting outputs to the active pilot warehouse location.

> The next milestone assesses QC behavior on the pilot subset and sets the initial pass/fail fields used during production rollout.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The next milestone assesses single-cell QC behavior on the pilot subset and sets the initial pass/fail fields used during production rollout.
```

Author: Thanks, moved to this in various spots.

The following milestone applies the pilot-validated workflow and warehouse writer to the production dataset.
A later milestone backfills prior patients, decides whether OME-Arrow is needed for image crops or chunk-level access, and formalizes the full QC decision policy.
Patient profile analysis supports both individually processed patient profiles and combined-patient profile tables.
Combined-patient analyses can still concatenate selected profiles for pycytominer feature selection, aggregation, and related cytomining workflows.
pycytominer-style operations are expected to be compatible with iceberg-bioimage warehouse tables because the profile outputs remain tabular, metadata-prefixed, and feature-column oriented.

> The highest-risk work is not the Parquet writing itself; it is making stable identifiers, patient/well/FOV metadata, object-parent links, and QC behavior consistent across batches before scaling.

Reviewer 2: What is QC behavior? Do you mean it is high risk to assume QC is working properly (e.g., minimizing biological phenotypes versus maximizing removal of segmentation artifacts)? Recommend being more explicit here.

Author: Thanks, added some specificity into the mix here for QC.

## Required specifications

Two small project specifications precede implementation:

- **Identifier spec:** deterministic `Metadata_Biology_PatientTumor`, `Metadata_Imaging_ImageID`, `Metadata_Object_ObjectID`, and parent object rules, including how IDs survive reprocessing.
- **Column schema spec:** required columns, types, nullability, and join keys for each canonical table.

This plan keeps the current pipeline scientifically intact while making the data FAIRer, easier to audit, and easier to extend to new patients, microscopes, features, and image-backed machine learning analyses.

[iceberg-warehouse]: https://github.com/WayScience/iceberg-bioimage/blob/main/docs/src/warehouse-spec.md
[cytotable]: https://github.com/cytomining/CytoTable
[curc-persistence1]: https://curc.readthedocs.io/en/latest/clusters/alpine/quick-start.html
[nextflow-slurm]: https://docs.seqera.io/nextflow/executor
[ome-arrow]: https://github.com/WayScience/ome-arrow
[ome-arrow-benchmarks]: https://github.com/WayScience/ome-arrow-benchmarks
[zedprofiler]: https://github.com/WayScience/ZedProfiler

> [zedprofiler-features]: https://github.com/WayScience/ZedProfiler/blob/main/docs/src/features/Feature_Naming_Convention.md

Reviewer 2: Should you add pycytominer and coSMicQC?

Author: Thanks, added.

---
title: Future processing plan
---

# Future processing plan

> This pipeline will become a **manifest-driven bioimage profiling warehouse**: every image, object, whole-image QC result, single-cell/object QC result, feature table, and patient annotation is joinable by stable identifiers, without requiring a bespoke database service.

Reviewer 3: What do you mean by "this pipeline"? How does the answer intersect with this repo?

Reviewer 3: Also, what is "manifest-driven"? I recommend using plain, non-jargon language

Author: Thanks - changed from pipeline to repository, and defined manifest a bit more (I think we should stick with this word and educate the reader on the jargon).

The design follows the [iceberg-bioimage warehouse specification][iceberg-warehouse], uses [OME-Arrow][ome-arrow] where image payloads or chunk metadata need tabular access, and uses [**ZedProfiler**][zedprofiler] as the feature extractor for morphology profiles.

> ZedProfiler's [feature naming convention][zedprofiler-features] is the column standard for profile outputs.

Reviewer 3: there could be a thought missing here about how ZP interacts with the warehouse - this is part of the innovation for the future processing, so it might be worth mentioning here (I'm sure you elaborate on it below)

Author: Thanks - added a bit more here that the zp outputs are part of the profiles within the warehouse.

> ## Target data contract

Reviewer 3: What is a "target data contract"? I recommend defining somewhere, if this is important technical language. If it jargon, rephrase; if it is just terse, expand with a full sentence

Author: Thanks - simplified here to "target warehouse structure".

> The shared warehouse lives on **Isilon storage** when that storage is available to the compute environment.

Reviewer 3: consider defining isilon

Author: Thanks, defined this a bit more.

> For Alpine or other HPC environments without Isilon access, the warehouse can live under the repository's gitignored **`data/`** directory as a local execution target.

Reviewer 3: are you thinking this is for version 3, as part of the reprocessing exercise of current data, or, is this part of the future of processing for all data?

Reviewer 3: no matter the answer, consider restructuring this document to make it clear which one we're talking about - are we talking about both? If so, then consider separating the short from mid-term goals

Author: Thanks - good questions - I think removing the version distinctions might be a good idea, and then we just refer to "the future plan" and adjust as needed (specific versions are variable between concept to implementation).

The repository tracks workflow code, schema definitions, validation code, configuration, and small reference manifests that point to the active warehouse location.

> Each warehouse root contains Parquet-first tables plus **`warehouse_manifest.json`**.

Reviewer 3: what can one expect to find in this file?

Author: Thanks - added further definition to what the manifest json involves.

> **OME-TIFF** or **OME-Zarr** remain the source image assets when that is sufficient; **OME-Arrow** is reserved for derived crops, chunk indexes, or image tensors that need to be joined and filtered with profiles in DuckDB.

Reviewer 3: can you think of an example case for OME-Arrow?

Author: Thanks - good thinking, added

> The [OME-Arrow benchmarks][ome-arrow-benchmarks] justify this selective use: reported results include faster bulk image reads and writes for Arrow-backed layouts, a roughly millisecond-scale NF1 feature-to-image join, and faster metadata scans than converted OME-Zarr metadata.

Reviewer 3: can you comment on what this means in practice? Is it that we receive images from collaborators, convert to OME-Zarr and then output processed data structures (e.g., ZP features) as OME-arrow?

Author: Thanks - I think it goes: custom Tiff --> OME-Zarr --> (crops) OME-Arrow.

> Required namespaces and tables:

Reviewer 3: is this for the manifest json file?

Author: Thanks, no, this is a little different. Will clarify within the doc.

- `images.image_assets`: one row per image asset with `Metadata_Biology_PatientTumor`, `Metadata_Biology_PatientID`, `Metadata_Experiment_PlateID`, `Metadata_Experiment_WellID`, `Metadata_Imaging_FieldID`, `Metadata_Imaging_ImageID`, channel, z/t/c/y/x shape, dtype, source URI, and processing provenance.

> - `quality_control.image_qc`: candidate whole-image blur, saturation, module-error, and exclusion flags generated before segmentation and featurization, keyed by `Metadata_Imaging_ImageID`, with patient, well, and field metadata repeated only when useful for reading.

Reviewer 3: I'm not sure if we're ready to "harden this into 3D whole-image QC" - well, not in the short term. This goes back to my initial uncertainty of what level of future are we talking?

Author: Thanks - I think because we know we will want to try some of these things that they should be a "candidate design" rather than what we define for "canon" with QC. This way, we try things out, iterate, and move on quickly. Added this into the doc.

  Initial records are derived from the existing CellProfiler `MeasureImageQuality` outputs where available, and the pilot hardens this into a reproducible 3D whole-image QC stage with canonical metrics and thresholds.
- `quality_control.segmentation_qc`: mask existence, object counts, object geometry, parent-child consistency, and crop-readiness flags generated after 3D segmentation and before feature extraction, keyed by `Metadata_Imaging_ImageID`, object compartment, and, when relevant, `Metadata_Object_ObjectID`.
- `profiles.organoid_profiles`, `profiles.cell_profiles`, `profiles.nuclei_profiles`, `profiles.cytoplasm_profiles`, and `profiles.nucleocentric_profiles`: one biological object type per table, each keyed by `Metadata_Biology_PatientTumor`, `Metadata_Imaging_ImageID`, `Metadata_Object_ObjectID`, and, when relevant, `Metadata_Object_ParentOrganoidID` or `Metadata_Object_ParentCellID`.

> - `profiles.cqc_flags`: post-featurization single-cell and object-level QC flags from [coSMicQC][cosmicqc], keyed by `Metadata_Biology_PatientTumor`, `Metadata_Imaging_ImageID`, `Metadata_Object_ObjectID`, and object compartment.

Reviewer 3: could use a comment here about how this is uncharted territory for cqc. This, I feel more comfortable in "hardening" here

Author: Thanks - moved qc work to be prospective throughout.

  This table is the middle layer between raw object profiles and normalized, selected, or consensus profiles.
- `profiles.normalized_profiles`, `profiles.selected_profiles`, and `profiles.consensus_profiles`: derived analytical tables that preserve the same stable identifiers and declare their parent tables in the manifest.

> - `profiles.patient_treatment_annotations`: patient, tumor, plate map, treatment, dose, unit, target, class, and therapeutic category keyed by patient and well.

Reviewer 3: are these the platemaps?

Author: Thanks, yes, updating.

        object_profiles["profiles.object_tables"]
        cqc_flags["profiles.cqc_flags"]
        derived_profiles["profiles.derived_profiles"]
        treatment_annotations["profiles.patient_treatment_annotations"]
        ome_arrow_assets["OME-Arrow crops / chunk index"]
    end

    nextflow_pipeline --> nextflow_controller
    schema_specs --> nextflow_controller
    validation_code --> nextflow_controller
    warehouse_references -.-> warehouse_manifest
    nextflow_controller -->|sbatch| image_qc_jobs
    nextflow_controller -->|sbatch| segmentation_jobs
    nextflow_controller -->|sbatch| segmentation_qc_jobs
    nextflow_controller -->|sbatch| featurization_jobs
    nextflow_controller -->|sbatch| cytotable_view_jobs
    nextflow_controller -->|sbatch| object_qc_jobs
    nextflow_controller -->|sbatch| profile_jobs
    image_qc_jobs --> image_qc
    image_qc -->|image-level gates| segmentation_jobs
    segmentation_jobs --> segmentation_qc_jobs
    segmentation_qc_jobs --> segmentation_qc
    segmentation_qc -->|mask gates| featurization_jobs
    segmentation_jobs --> image_assets
    segmentation_jobs --> object_profiles
    featurization_jobs --> object_profiles

>     object_profiles -->|warehouse profiles| cytotable_view_jobs

Reviewer 3: it's unclear to me why cytotable is mentioned here - are we skipping cytotable?

Author: Thanks - I think we should remove cytotable here.

    cytotable_view_jobs -->|CytoTable-shaped input| object_qc_jobs
    object_qc_jobs --> cqc_flags
    object_profiles -->|features ready| profile_jobs
    cqc_flags -->|single-cell / object filters| profile_jobs
    image_qc -->|image-level flags| profile_jobs
    treatment_annotations -->|annotations| profile_jobs
    profile_jobs --> derived_profiles
    image_assets --> warehouse_manifest
    image_qc --> warehouse_manifest
    segmentation_qc --> warehouse_manifest
    object_profiles --> warehouse_manifest
    cqc_flags --> warehouse_manifest
    derived_profiles --> warehouse_manifest
    treatment_annotations --> warehouse_manifest
    ome_arrow_assets --> warehouse_manifest
    run_reports --> warehouse_manifest
```

## Workflow and observability

### Workflow manager

The workflow layer treats **SLURM as a first-class execution backend**, because the current shell-plus-SLURM pattern is practical but too hard to audit, restart, and parameterize across patients.

> **Nextflow is the workflow manager for this pipeline** because its [SLURM executor][nextflow-slurm] submits each process as a separate SLURM job and supports queue controls, local execution, containers, task caching, `-resume`-based workflow continuation, and selective job arrays for homogeneous high-cardinality tasks.

Reviewer 3: it was jarring to me to see this here - won't this be a substantial lift? (related to my comment on time resolution of future - short, mid?)

Author: Thanks - I think we need to try something there, as we discussed, otherwise we'll surely face major bottlenecks.

**SLURM job arrays** are used selectively for uniform per-well/FOV shards such as whole-image QC, segmentation, and featurization when resource requirements are consistent.
Tasks with variable memory, GPU, walltime, or container needs remain ordinary SLURM jobs.

> ### CURC deployment

Reviewer 3: Is the abstraction layer correct? By that I mean should we write to CURC or SLURM more broadly?

Author: Thanks - I'll write this in more explicitly.

Scratch space is used only for ephemeral Nextflow work directories and temporary task files.
Durable workflow outputs, warehouse tables, manifests, reports, and logs are published to Isilon or to the active gitignored `data/` warehouse target before scratch cleanup.

### Run records

Each step writes a small run record next to its outputs: command, git commit, container or environment hash, input table versions, row counts, column counts, elapsed time, and pass/fail status.

### Observability

**Observability combines Nextflow run artifacts with SLURM accounting** rather than requiring a separate monitoring server.
Nextflow emits a trace table, timeline report, DAG, execution report, `.nextflow.log`, and per-process logs under a stable run directory.
The trace table captures process name, patient, well/FOV shard, status, attempt, runtime, CPU, memory, exit code, work directory, and published outputs.
SLURM job IDs are retained so failed or slow tasks can be inspected with `sacct`, `squeue`, `seff`, and the process `.command.out` and `.command.err` files.

> A single DuckDB validation script combines these run artifacts with the warehouse manifest to check manifest conformance, join-key uniqueness, feature-name validity, orphaned profiles, whole-image exclusion rates, segmentation QC failures, single-cell/object filtering rates, failed tasks, retry counts, and resource outliers.

Reviewer 3: is this a DBMI utility, written in DBMI github?

Author: Thanks, no, this is simple validation here in this repo, I feel.

## ZedProfiler integration

> The main implementation work is the **featurization to image-based profiling** handoff.

Reviewer 3: this is the highest priority work, definitely the "short-term" I envision. This is the minimum for "v3" - the rest I see as v4 (or even some as v5)

Author: Thanks, rewording prioritization.

> ZedProfiler replaces the current local handcrafted featurization modules as the production feature extractor for supported object-level 3D morphology profiles.

Reviewer 3: might be worth commenting that ZP and these handcrafted featurization modules are identical currently, but are likely to drift as future development will occur in ZP

Please also make sure to link ZP here

Author: Thanks, will do.

Its inputs are the registered image assets, segmentation masks, channel metadata, object identifiers, and parent-object relationships produced upstream.
Its supported feature classes are Colocalization, Granularity, Intensity, Neighbors, Texture, and VolumeSizeShape.
Its outputs are per-compartment handcrafted feature tables for nuclei, cells, cytoplasm, and organoids, written with ZedProfiler-compatible feature names and `Metadata_*` identifiers.

> Bespoke deep-learning featurization remains in the workflow for masked 3D features across nuclei, cells, cytoplasm, and organoids.

Reviewer 3: This, IMO, belongs in a new H3 header

Author: Thanks, will do.

Bespoke deep-learning featurization also remains for nucleocentric non-masked 3D crops from the nuclei mask and nucleocentric non-masked 2D z-maximum projections.
All handcrafted and deep-learning feature outputs publish into `profiles.object_tables`, then flow into existing normalization, feature selection, aggregation, and consensus-profile logic.
Whole-image QC runs before segmentation and featurization so failed image assets can be excluded or flagged before expensive downstream work.
The starting implementation hardens the existing CellProfiler `MeasureImageQuality` pipeline rather than assuming it is already production-ready for 3D.

> The pilot formalizes the 3D whole-image QC fields, thresholds, output paths, and pass/fail semantics.

Reviewer 3: My intuition here is that this is currently a rabbit hole; if we can avoid it now (leaving it for future work that will happen outside the context of this project) I think we'll save some time.

I might recommend poking a head or two into this rabbit hole, lifting a shovel or two worth of dirt, but not going too deep just yet

Author: Thanks, will avoid this.

Segmentation QC runs after 3D segmentation and before feature extraction to check mask completeness, object counts, parent-child links, and crop readiness.
Its flags are written to `quality_control.segmentation_qc` so segmentation failures are not conflated with image acquisition failures or post-featurization single-cell/object outliers.

> Single-cell and object-level QC runs after ZedProfiler and bespoke deep-learning featurization so feature missingness, object outliers, failed crops, and late-stage profiling errors can be tracked separately from image acquisition failures.

Reviewer 3: sorry to not notice until now, but we're using ZEDProfiler (all caps zed, I believe)

Author: Thanks, I'll address this.

The post-featurization QC tool is [coSMicQC][cosmicqc], using a CytoTable-compatible view or export generated from the warehouse profile tables.
Its flags are written to `profiles.cqc_flags` before normalization, feature selection, aggregation, or consensus profiling.
The warehouse keeps the `Metadata_*` schema as the source of truth while the compatibility view maps those tables into the current coSMicQC input shape.
[CytoTable][cytotable] is not the execution engine for this path.
CytoTable remains a compatibility bridge for coSMicQC and single-cell or object-profile table shapes, not the scheduler or canonical storage layer.

## Implementation sequence

1. **Pilot subset selection:** use `NF0014_T1` and `NF0055_T1`, selecting a few DMSO and treated well/FOVs from each to cover normal images, candidate whole-image QC cases, segmentation edge cases, image-size variation, and object-count variation.

> 2. **Pilot workflow orchestration:** run the pilot subset through the Nextflow `slurm` profile on CURC Persistence1 and Alpine, using scratch only for temporary work and publishing durable Nextflow and SLURM observability artifacts to the active pilot warehouse run-artifacts path on Isilon or the gitignored `data/` fallback.

Reviewer 3: Pending a @MikeLippincott confirmation of segmentation, IIUC

Reviewer 3: Also, a confirmation of all ZP bug fixes - perhaps we can plan/specify a ZP release version

Author: Thanks - I tried to address this with further changes.

3. **Pilot warehouse conversion:** publish the pilot workflow outputs to the active pilot warehouse path to finalize identifier rules, canonical table schemas, ZedProfiler feature-name validation, `warehouse_manifest.json`, and DuckDB validation.

> 4. **Pre-production QC assessment:** harden and rerun the CellProfiler whole-image QC workflow on the pilot subset, map its outputs into initial 3D whole-image QC fields, review segmentation QC flags after mask generation, then run coSMicQC through the CytoTable-compatible profile view to review post-featurization single-cell/object QC flags before expanding to the production dataset.

Reviewer 3: don't go too deep here, please! Maybe enough for @jenna-tomkinson (Jenna, I recommend reviewing all my comments in this PR, to get a better sense of my thinking on future dev) to get a feel for MIICE application, which, I believe 3D images will play a larger role now, after this project

Author: Thanks, will avoid this in a revision.

> 5. **Production workflow rollout:** apply the same Nextflow profile and warehouse writer to the production dataset after the pilot passes orchestration, output, validation, whole-image QC, segmentation QC, single-cell/object QC, and job-array checks.

Reviewer 3: There might be one confirmation for @MikeLippincott to serve as gatekeeper here as well - accurate object ID assignment, IIUC

Author: Adding in id assignment too, thanks.

6. **DuckDB validation view:** use DuckDB to inspect pilot and production warehouse tables for expected joins, row counts, metadata completeness, feature columns, image-level flags, segmentation flags, and `profiles.cqc_flags`.

> 7. **Operational validation:** emit run records, Nextflow/SLURM observability artifacts, well/FOV-level profiling status, and a one-command validation report for collaborators, maintainers, and release checkpoints.

Reviewer 3: Depending on what you had in mind Dave, I might recommend a pre-operational validation step as well

Author: Thanks, added this in.

Author: More validation, the merrier, I think here.

The validation report tracks each well/FOV from segmentation through ZedProfiler feature extraction and downstream image-based profiling so late-stage profile errors are visible even when earlier stages succeed.

> ## Implementation scope

Reviewer 3: This looks good to me - please make sure to update if the implementation sequence changes

A later milestone backfills prior patients, decides whether OME-Arrow is needed for image crops or chunk-level access, and formalizes the full QC decision policy across image-level and object-level decisions.
Patient profile analysis supports both individually processed patient profiles and combined-patient profile tables.
Combined-patient analyses can still concatenate selected profiles for [pycytominer][pycytominer] feature selection, aggregation, and related cytomining workflows.
[pycytominer][pycytominer] operations are expected to be compatible with iceberg-bioimage warehouse tables because the profile outputs remain tabular, metadata-prefixed, and feature-column oriented.
The highest-risk work is not the Parquet writing itself; it is making stable identifiers, patient/well/FOV metadata, object-parent links, whole-image QC gates, and post-featurization single-cell/object QC thresholds consistent across batches before scaling.
Those QC thresholds must remove imaging failures, segmentation artifacts, failed crops, and unusable objects without systematically removing biologically meaningful treatment or patient phenotypes.

> ## Alternatives considered

Reviewer 3: are these considered and decided not to pursue? Is there a time component to them (i.e., does it mean we will never consider again?)

Author: Made it explicit that these are not things we will do right now, thanks.

- **More minimal architecture:** the proposed plan is already the minimum viable structure for this dataset because it includes only stable IDs, a manifest, Parquet tables, Nextflow-on-SLURM execution, and lightweight validation.
- **Simpler data storage:** loose Parquet files, CSVs, and one-off DuckDB files are easy to write, but they do not define stable identifiers, table lineage, required schemas, or image-to-profile joins.
- **CellProfiler:** remains useful for established image QC and feature extraction modules, but it is not the warehouse, scheduler, provenance system, or cross-patient profile query layer.
- **CytoTable as execution engine:** remains useful for converting and joining CellProfiler-style tables, but it is not an orchestrator for SLURM jobs, long-running workflow state, retries, run observability, or warehouse-level contracts.
- **scverse:** might be useful downstream for selected single-cell matrices, but it is not the primary data model for multi-compartment 3D image assets, masks, QC tables, patient annotations, and parent-object relationships.

## Required specifications

Two small project specifications precede implementation:

> - **Identifier spec:** deterministic `Metadata_Biology_PatientTumor`, `Metadata_Imaging_ImageID`, `Metadata_Object_ObjectID`, and parent object rules, including how IDs survive reprocessing.

Reviewer 3: does this exist already? Consider actually writing this table in this PR, if possible (you can also include it as a table here [or maybe even at the top of this doc])

Author: Thanks, made a table.

Plain names such as `dataset_id` and `image_id` remain logical shorthand in implementation discussions, not profile-table column names.
For this dataset, `dataset_id` maps to the plate-level `Metadata_Biology_PatientTumor` value.

```mermaid
flowchart LR
    subgraph git_repo["Git repository"]
        nextflow_pipeline["Nextflow pipeline"]
        schema_specs["schema specs"]
        validation_code["validation code"]
        warehouse_references["warehouse reference manifests"]
    end

    subgraph curc_persistence["CURC Persistence1"]
        nextflow_controller["Nextflow controller"]
        run_reports["trace / timeline / report"]
    end

    subgraph alpine_slurm["Alpine SLURM"]
        image_qc_jobs["CellProfiler whole-image QC jobs"]
        segmentation_jobs["segmentation jobs"]
        segmentation_qc_jobs["segmentation QC jobs"]
        featurization_jobs["ZedProfiler feature extraction jobs"]
        cytotable_view_jobs["CytoTable-compatible QC view jobs"]
        object_qc_jobs["coSMicQC single-cell / object QC jobs"]

>         profile_jobs["normalization / aggregation jobs"]

Reviewer 2: What is segmentation QC? What is CytoTable-compatible QC? There is a lot of use of QC in this workflow that might need refining before merging.

Author: Thanks, removed / cleaned up the diagram a bit more based on this.
